Now let's write a higher schema.
So I'm not gonna pretend that I'm
some database admin expert that knows
everything about optimizing indexes and
things like that because I'm not,
that's just not what I do.
I'm definitely more of a product engineer
and I kind of just work with whatever
tools I need to build something
that people are addicted to or
at least I like to think that.
So this is just how I think about
modeling data from my perspective.
What I like to do is think about all
the information that's on the screen and
kind of walk backwards from there.
So if I have a design from a designer,
I can look at that design and
look at all the information
that's in that design and
that can help me derive
the models that I need to create.
And then there's auxiliary models and
connections and
relationships that exist from there.
And then there's things that
aren't on the screen but
still need to be maintained in
the database and that's other things.
But for the most part, when it comes to
the product, it's what's on the screen and
how do you walk backwards from there?
And then from there, it's, well,
what do the queries look like?
Because that's big too.
Depending on the queries you write, that's
gonna determine what indexes you create,
because that's why you have indexes in
the first place is to optimise queries.
And that's pretty much where I tap out,
anything beyond that I let
the database experts handle that.
But we won't even get there,
so we're good.
Just wanted to give you my thought process
on how I model data because you might go
through this and be, [SOUND] I
would have done that differently.
But now you know how I think about it.
That's why I did it the way that I did it.
So anyway, let's do it.
If we just take a quick look at what we
have here, It's not a complicated schema.
I mean, it's gonna be a pretty
simple project task management app,
where we have a user and the user has
projects and those projects have tasks.
And that's mostly it.
There's a lot of relationships between
the three, but that's mostly it.
So what we can do now is we can
go ahead and create this user.
So the first thing I'm
gonna do is make an ID and
go through and
kind of get all the other stuff in there.
So you can say Model User, like I said,
this is an ID it's a type of string.
You can also do integer if you prefer and
have your user IDs be numbers,
I don't like that, so
I'm gonna say String.
And them gonna say this is an id,
like that.
And then I can say default.
And I'm gonna use uuid.
So this is just basically making
the user IDs strings of type uuid.
A uuid is a type of
universally unique identifier.
It's a formatted string
that looks a certain way,
that's pretty much guaranteed to
be unique, that's what UID is.
So I'm making my user IDs UIDs.
Say created at, of course,
this is gonna be a date time, and
it's gonna default to now.
Then I can say updated at.
That's also gonna be a date time, and
then there's a special updated at.
So we don't have to touch it,
it just updates that field for
us automatically whenever
we touch this model.
Okay, then the users are gonna have
an email, which is gonna be a type string.
First name, which is also a string,
a last name.
We have a password.
Password,.that's a string.
What else do we have on here?
Projects and tasks, we'll, get to that
in a minute when we do relations.
So for user, for the most part,
that's pretty good.
So then we'll keep it moving and
we'll say, model project, and
we can just copy these first
three things here, put them here.
Everything's gonna have an ID,
a create app, an updated app, so
I'm just gonna put that there.
And a project has a name, that's a string.
What else would a project have?
It might have a status.
No, we have the owner stuff.
Yeah, so a project will also
have who owns the project.
Who does it belong to?
If we don't have this, when we do a query,
we won't know what project belongs
to the user that signed in.
We'll just be getting
random people's projects.
So we can say owner ID like this and
that's gonna be a string.
And then we can say owner.
Is going to be a user like that.
And then we can say it's gonna have
a relation with these fields of ownerId,
that maps to the reference
on the user's id like that.
And it's still gonna throw
me this little error here.
Basically this is saying is, I wanna have
an owner field whose type is user and
it's related to A user ID and
it maps to the owner ID over here.
So this owner ID is gonna
map to the ID on the user.
And it's freaking out right now it's,
hey you gotta go to the other side this
relationship add something there and
we could do that but I'm really lazy.
So I'm gonna do it the lazy way,
you can just run MPX Prisma format and
it'll do it for you.
So I did that and you can see right here
added project project, but I'm gonna
lowercase that and call it projects
plural because it's an array of projects.
It's a one to many relationship, so
I'm just gonna change that to projects.
And keep it the type project array.
All right,
keep it moving with the project.
What else do we have on here for
the project?
We have a description, a due.
We got some tasks.
And then we got whether it's deleted or
not, so let's do that.
So for description, We can say String.
Whether it's due or not,
that's gonna be a date time.
But maybe we don't want every single
one of these to have a description.
Maybe that's optional, so you can put
a question mark after the type and
now it's not required.
By default every field is required
unless you put a question mark after it.
So I'm saying the description is optional,
the due date is optional,
not all projects have a description,
not all projects have a due date,
maybe you have an open project
that never ends, so you do that.
And then we'll get back to the tasks
when we do the relationships and
now we could just do delete it.
So whether this was deleted or not, this
is something that a lot of people do for
soft deletes.
You ever heard of a soft delete?
Basically means we're never actually
gonna remove it from the database.
We're just gonna flag it, so
we can filter it out on our queries.
So that way if you ever restore your
account or if you wanna restore this,
it's always there, right?
That's how they get away with that.
So, that's why your data is never deleted,
it's just flagged.
All right, so deleted.
We can say that's a boolean and
it defaults to false And
then we'll keep going.
We'll do another one for task.
And like I said, we can copy these three.
Actually, we can probably copy these
four right here, put that in there.
And then tasks have a status,
a task can be started, completed,
whatever other status those
are gonna be called enums.
They're basically a set of different
values that never change and
we wanna be able to use one of those.
So we can have an enum type here and
we can call this task status.
Like that and
then we can just add those statuses.
So I have them here, not started,
started completed like that.
Yes
>> If a person said they'd rather soft
delete just because you can implement
undo right away if the user deletes.
>> Yeah, 100%, so, yeah,
that's why they have the soft delete so
you can get those people to come back and
take their money.
So, that's why it's there
All right, and then for status we'll say,
let me actually uppercase this.
There we go for
status is gonna be type task status.
And we can say it's gonna default
to just one of these which will
probably just be not started, there we go.
A task belongs to a project, so we can
say projectId, we'll just type String.
We can say projects,
we'll just type projects that has
a relation to the field
called project ID and
mapping that to the field
of ID on a project.
And because I'm lazy, I'm just gonna go
to my terminal, hit up and then enter,
format that.
And it's gonna add the task
to our project but
it's plural I'm gonna
lowercase it call it tasks
Okay, and what else do we have on a task?
I know I'm missing something, so yeah,
I think yeah, tasks also have owners.
I'm just gonna put that on there and then
description, due date and also delete.
So let's do that.
So we'll put the owner on here.
I think there's a query where there's
a view where you wanna get all the tasks
that a user created no matter
what project they're on.
So you would need an owner field here
because if you didn't have this field,
the only query you could make to get all
the tasks regardless of the project.
So to first get the all the tasks for
every project, and then add them together.
Just adding this one field saves you that,
so that's why we have that here.
So this is why I think it's important to
look at the data that's on the design so
you can kind of understand what fields you
have to add and relationships and whatnot.
So we got that.
We also need to do whether this is due or
not.
Date time.
This also has a status.
Does it have a status?
Yeah, no, we already did status.
It has it deleted And
this is Boolean and
it's gonna default to false.
Gonna run this again a format that,
gonna go back up to our owner
you can see it says task lowercase
that pluralize it, now we have tasks.
I think for
the most part I got everything in there.
The only other stuff I have in here are
these unique things, these index things.
So I'll put these in here and
I'll talk about them.
Basically what I'm doing here,
for instance on the project.
This is telling Prisma that we wanna
create a unique constraint
on this complex field.
So we're taking the combination
of an owner ID and a name and
saying that has to be unique.
This is saying a project owned by
one owner can't have the same name,
so you can't have two
projects with the same name.
That's what this is saying.
And then this is an index.
It's not it's not a unique constraint, but
I am telling it to set aside an index.
Because I'm probably gonna
write a query for this.
I'm probably gonna say I need to find
a project that belongs to this owner but
has this ID.
So I wanna write an index for that.
Otherwise, it'll scan the entire
projects table looking for a project.
So it's based off the information
that you're looking for, so
that's why that index is there.
But sometimes you don't really
know what these are ahead of time.
Indexing strategy happens in production,
after production,
as you build out features.
So sometimes you just don't know until you
understand what the queries are after you
write them so
you don't get it right all the time.
I have to go back and
write these after I wrote the queries,
cause I didn't know if I needed them or
not.
And I probably have some others for,
yeah, for the task.
So, this one is just saying, I wanna
index the owner ID of a task because I'm
probably gonna write a query that says,
give me all the tasks that
belongs to this owner.
So I need an index there,
otherwise, it'll be,
it'll still work without
the index it'll just be bad.
Some databases will allow you to
turn on the ability to have an error
thrown if you make a query
that's not indexed.
I know you can do that in Mongo, you can
say throw me an error if you detect me
making a query that isn't
taking advantage of an index.
And then that forces you to go write the
index and that's how I learned how to do
indexing was just let Mongo
scream at me until I go do it.